---
title: Introduction to Mathematical Thinking&#58; Week 1 Notes
layout: post
category: mathematical-thinking
desc: My notes from week 1 of coursera's Introduction to Mathematical Thinking class. Topics include patterns&#44; language&#44; Euclid's theorem and logical combinators
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

These are my notes from week 1 of Coursera's [Introduction to Mathematical Thinking](https://www.coursera.org/learn/mathematical-thinking) class.  

## High Level Summary

* Mathematics is the Science of Patterns
* In the 19th century math became more abstract. It also changed focus from calculation to analyzing relationships.
* Mathematicians use language is a precise way.  Almost every statement of mathematics, is a positive or negative version of one of the following four linguistic forms:
  1. Object *a* has property *P* 
  1. Every object of type *T* has property *P* 
  1. There is an object of type *T* having property *P* 
  1. If statement *A*, then statement *B* 
* When solving a problem look at the general pattern. It's important to understand what is going on vs finding the answer.  Finding the answer solves one problem.  Understanding lets you apply your approach to different circumstances.
* Logical Combinators:
  * and
    * Term: conjunction
    * Symbol: $$ \land $$
  * or (math uses inclusive-or)
    * Term: disjunction
    * Symbol: $$ \lor $$
  * not
    * Term: negation
    * Symbol: $$ \neg $$

<!--more-->

My more indepth notes are below.

## Lecture 1 - Introductory Material

* This class is about thinking, not learning new math techniques.
* Math was invented around 10,000 years ago for handling money.
* The math taught in high school is from the 17th century or earlier.  None of the math developed since the 17th century is taught in high school.
* In the 19th century mathematics changed:
  * it became much more abstract
  * its focus changed from calculation to analyzing relationships
* Mathematics is the **Science of Patterns**.
  * mathematicians identify and analyze abstract patterns
  * patterns can be found in many places.  Examples include:
    * numerical patterns
    * patterns of shape
    * voting patterns in populations
    * patterns of motion
    * can be real or imagined
    * static or dynamic
    * they can be external from us or internal to the human mind
* Different banches of mathematics:
  * Geometry - study of the patterns of shape
  * Calculus - study of the patterns of motion
  * Logic - study of the patterns of reason
  * Probability Theory - study of the patterns of chance
  * Topology - study the patterns of closeness and position
  * Fractal Geometry - study of the cell simularity found in the natural world
* Example of increase abstraction and complexity of mathematics in 19th century:
  * Banach-Tarski Paradox - you can cut a sphere in such a way that you can create two identical spheres that are the same size as the original sphere.
  * That doesn't seem possible, but it is possible according to the math.  Mathematicians had to learn to trust math above their intuitions.
* It is important to use precise language in mathematics.
  * Modern pure mathematics is primarily concerned with precise statements about mathematical objects. 
  * Mathematical objects are things like integers, real numbers, sets, functions, etc. 
* Examples of mathematical statements:
  * There are infinitely many prime numbers. 
  * For every real number, a, the equation $$ x^2 + a = 0 $$ has a real root. 
  * $$ \sqrt{2} $$ is irrational
* Mathematicians are interested in knowing which statements are true and false. In the above examples number 2 is false. Number 1 and 3 are true.
* Regarding statement 1, how do we prove it is true? The following is [Euclid's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid's_theorem):
  * Given a list of prime numbers: $$ p_1,p_2,p_3\ldots,p_n  $$ we want to find another prime number to continue the list.  If we can, then we have proved there are an infinite number of prime numbers.
  * Let $$ N = (p_1*p_2*p_3\ldots*p_n) + 1  $$
  * So, $$ N > p_n $$. 
  * If N is prime, we have found a prime bigger than $$ p_n $$.  
  * If N is not prime, it is divisible by a prime number, P.  
    * Why is N divisible by a prime number? This is the [fundamental theorem of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_arithmetic) which states that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or is the product of prime numbers.It was described by Euclid in [Elements Book Book VII Proposition 31](http://aleph0.clarku.edu/~djoyce/java/elements/bookVII/propVII31.html).
  * Now P cannot be any of $$ p_1,p_2,p_3\ldots,p_n $$, because divding N by any one of those would leave a remainder of 1.  Therefore, $$ P > p_n $$ and we have found a prime number bigger than $$ p_n $$ and the list continues.
* In every day English language we have a context of a general knowledge of the world which helps to minimize any ambiguity.  However, ambiguity can still arise, as humourous newspaper headlines show:
  * Sisters reunited after ten years in checkout line at Safeway. 
  * Large hole appears in High Street. City authorities are looking into it.
* In mathematics it is important to be precise.  Miscalculations in engineering and science can be costly or deadly.
* Mathematical language is made precise by making the statements very restrictive.
* Almost every statement of mathematics, is a positive or negative version of one of the following four linguistic forms:
  1. Object *a* has property *P* 
    * e.g. 3 is a prime number
  1. Every object of type *T* has property *P* 
    * e.g. Every polynomial equation has a complex root
  1. There is an object of type *T* having property *P* 
    * e.g. There is a prime number between 20 and 25
  1. If statement *A*, then statement *B* 
    * e.g. If p is a prime of the form 4n + 1, then p is a sum of two squares.
* A mathematical statement can also be a combination of the above using the combinators: 
  * and
  * or
  * not
* Ancient Greeks realized that all mathematical statements can be expressed using these terms.  They studied the key language terms involved:
  * and
  * or
  * not
  * implies
  * for all
  * there exists
* They provided definitions for these terms and analyzed their behaviour
* This study is known as formal logic or mathematical logic
* In assignment 1 we had the following question:

  >  The following notice was posted on the wall of a hospital emergency room: *No head injury is too trivial to ignore.* Reformulate to avoid the unintended second reading. (The context for this sentence is so strong
that many people have difficulty seeing there is an alternative meaning.)

* I  had trouble seeing the second meaning.  I liked Dr. Devlin's response on the discussion forum on how to approach the problem:

  > Remember, the course is about mathematical thinking. Look at the general pattern. The sentence is of the form No A is to B to C. Look at different examples for A, B, C. See how you understand them. Do you naturally conclude that you do C or do not do C? Don't get hung up on "getting an answer". The goal is to understand the phenomenon. That's what mathematical thinking is about. Once you understand, getting an answer is easy. But getting an answer often does not result in understanding. An answer can be used on a few occasions. Understanding can be used many times in different circumstances.



## Lecture 2 - Logical Combinators

* This topic was about the logical combinators **and**, **or**, **not**
* I am familiar with these from programming so did not take many notes.
* I did take some notes about the symbols and terminology used in math 
* **and**
  * Symbol: $$ \land $$
  * **Conjunction**: $$ \phi \land \psi $$ 
  * $$ \phi, \psi $$ are called the conjucts of $$ \phi \land \psi $$ 
  * Conjunctions is comuntitive:  $$ \phi \land \psi  =   \psi \land \phi $$ 
    * But this is not the case for the word 'and' in the English language. The following two sentences are not the same:
      * John took a free kick and the ball went into the net
      * The ball went into the net and John took a freee kick
  * The associative property holds for conjunction:  $$ (\phi\land\psi)\land\theta = \phi\land(\psi\land\theta) $$
  * The distributive property holds for conjunction across disjunction: $$ \phi\land(\psi\lor\theta) = (\phi\land\psi)\lor(\phi\land\theta) $$
* **exclusive-or**
  * $$ a > 0 $$ or the equation $$ x^2 + a = 0 $$ has a real root
    * Both statements cannot be true (there is no value of 'a' greater than 0 that will satisfy $$ x^2 + a = 0 $$).
    * Only $$ a > 0 $$ is true or $$ x^2 + a = 0 $$ is true
* **inclusive-or**
  * In math, or means inclusive-or
  * ab = 0 if a = 0 or b = 0
    * Both can be true at the same time
  * Symbol: $$ \lor $$
  * **Disjunction**: $$ \phi \lor \psi $$
    * $$ \phi, \psi $$ are called the disjuncts of $$ \phi \lor \psi $$
  * The associative property holds for disjunction: $$ (\phi\lor\psi)\lor\theta = \phi\lor(\psi\lor\theta) $$
  * The distributive property holds for disjunction across conjunction: $$ \phi\lor(\psi\land\theta) = (\phi\lor\psi)\land(\phi\lor\theta)$$
* **not**
  * Symbol: $$ \neg $$
  * **Negation**: $$ \neg\psi $$
    * The negation of $$ \psi $$
  * If $$ \psi $$ is true, then $$ \neg\psi $$ is false
  * If $$ \psi $$ is false, then $$ \neg\psi $$ is true


